---
layout: post
title: Preparing a Session
subtitle: A guide for DM's
tags: [guide,preperation, DM]
---

# Intro
I've only got 20 Pages and 10 Encounters planned, is that too little? I prepared for X but my players did Y, help?! How do you organize your Sessions? 
Those and many more similar questions float around the internet. Being a DM can lead to a certain degree of insecurity, but you shouldn't be insecure. You are a dungeon master, a master of dungeons, creator a worlds and destroyer of the same! Dragons and krakens appear at your will and will shiver in fear when you say so. 

Preparing for sessions is something every DM does differently, there are some that really need 20 pages of planned content with 10 encounters, all organized in a Cloud backuped folder. And there are some that need only one phrase written on the back of a fast food bill. Finding out how much you need is a thing of habit, just try out different approach until you find something that works for you. Everything i will write about in this blog is not to tell experienced DM's that they do it wrong, or to tell unexperienced DM's how they will have to do it. I just want to give my readers a insight on how i do it, since i have found out what works best for me, and i feel its a really good balance between work and reward. 

I try to keep my session notes tidy and simple. Two A4 Pages at most, mostly its half a page to one page long. When you have your notes lying before you while running the session you want to see whats happening next and you want to know what you are currently doing without having to flip through a small novel. 
The exception of course are notes related to the session. Which include monster stat blocks, npc descriptions or fully fleshed out dungeons with all their traps and rooms.
Not long ago i ran a session where my players found a desperate wife alone on the street, she asked them to help rescue her husband which got kidnapped by a bunch of fire beasts. They tracked their trace back to their dungeon and fought against burning insects, escaped hot steamy traps, allied with the kidnappers to defeat their tyrrant leader who kept the husband in a cage. The whole dungeon took roughly two four hour sessions to complete. 
My notes for those two sessions were oen and a half pages describing the dungeon and nothing more. Those one and a half pages lasted for 8 hours of play! It took me roughly only one to two hours to write them up. So one hour of preperation for 4 hours of play, seems like a pretty good deal. So now i'll tell you what i think about while writing preparing a session.

# Keep it manageable
I'll think about where my players currently are, what they could do there, and where i want them to go next. 
If they are in a city and have to find a dwarven hermit somewhere in the mountains they might need a guide or maybe they want to buy climbing gear. It would be cool if they met a dwarf living in the city that tells them about the hermit, some interesting backstory why he is not with his clan. It will help the characters look forward to the hermit, Trekor Rockslide is not longer a name they have heard from the last NPC they met. It's now a name that has been mentioned twice, the hermit will feel more real, he is something that really exists in this world.

So i want the session to start in the city, having lots of NPC's talking with the players. Then i want them to go to the mountain range, is there a forest between mountains and city? Are there monsters inside it? Think about what would make this travelling part interesting. Your players just talked for the last 30-60 minutes, what would bring a nice change of pace? Lets say they are ambushed by wood elves which want to defend their forest from intruders, they are not hostile, but appear to be ready to release ten arrows into your players at the first sign of combat. Your players can decide to fight them, or the convince them that they mean no harm. You should not make the elves an invincible force. Prepare that your players will at least think about fighting every encounter you throw at them.

After they dealt with the elves they arrive at the base of the mountains. They will have to climb at some points, let them roll a few checks if they make it. Make it easier for them if they bought climbing gear in the city. You could plan an alternative encounter with some mountain bandits or monsters if your players resolved the wood elves encounter peacefully (some groups will yearn for atleast one combat per session). And finally, maybe after a nights rest in a cave, they meet Trekor Rockslide, the hermit that can help them finish their quest.

Usually i want my session to end on a hook for the next session, i want to give them something to think about. Otherwise might have disoriented players at the start of the next session. In my example you could have them finish the rest just to have Trekor appear in the morning, mysteriously standing in fron of them as the first sunshine begins to light up the cave. Or if you still want to play a little longer you could have him talk to them, explain that their quest is more than they think, they have to stop a great evil before its too late, you could reveal something big. And before your players spike Trekor with questions you end the session. But be aware, using cliffhangers every single session will be exhausting, if you use them too frequently your players won't care about them anymore.

# Complications
There are many ways to build in complications, they are after all what make the story interesting. If you players go from the city to the hermit without a problem they won't feel that they accomplished something. Players need to have something they can feel proud of. Your charismatic bard wants to find the best price for potions in the city, your druid wants to sympathize with the wood elves, your ranger wants to make the mountain climb easier and you barbarian wants to fuck something up. 

There are many forms of complications, the most common being a combat encounter. But everything that might drain resources from your players is a complication, having to persuade a guard might eat a charm spell. Dealing with a uncrossable river your druid has to shapeshift into a crocodile to get everyone across. I also like to use time as a resource in my campaigns. Every day someting happens in my world. If the players decide to take a few weeks off some orc raiders can attack the village of a characters family, or some great thief guild could have stolen a powerful artifact from an archmage, starting a big war. 

I try to have atleast one complication happen at every point of interest. Including settlements, forests, ruins, lakes or mountains. If no complications happens, i would atleast have a small social encounter ready: "The players come accross a river but there is a bridge, a human boy sits on the bridge with a fishing rod in his hand. Excitedly he asks them about their adventures before focusing on fishing again." or "The group rests in the spooky forest, suddenly thick fog appears out of nowhere, they all see ghostly appearences of animals jumping around them. A ghostly fox steals some of their provisions. After five seconds the fog disappears, and with it the animals."
Having little events like these just make the world feel more alive, the spooky forest has a backstory, even though it's one the players don't know about.

# Backstory Moments
Every time i prepare i also take a short look at all of my players backstories again. I think about things i that could happen this session which are tied to one of them. Could i tie the monks monastery to the monastery they pass through this session? Will the veteran fighter know any of the guards stationed at the watchtower at the edge of civilisation?

It's important that the players feel like a part of your world. Otherwise they don't really care when something big happens. If a war wages between two nations and the families of your players are nothing more than names on paper, nobody cares if they die. But if your whole party met each family atleast one and helped them in little side quests they will sacrifice everything they have got to save them from danger.

# Rewards
The first thing everybody will think about when hearing "rewards" will probably be magic items. But there is much more that you can give your players to make them feel rewarded. They can meet an important figure of an organization and gain a favor from them. They could do a act of great kindness and be rewarded with a blessing from the deity of charity. Think about what your players will gain until the end of the session that increases their power, directly or indirectly. A underappreciated reward in many dungeons and dragons groups is inspiration, you can gift the players a point of inspiration, which enables them to reroll a dice once. And lastly, the greatest reward of them all, levelling up. It's the best feeling of progression you can give your players.

# Improvisation
Always try to keep your session notes loosely tied together, so that you can leave room for improvisation and player choices. Try to not railroad your players straight down a path, without any choices that influence it. Of course, if it's important for your story, you can send them down a pre defined path. But there should be many little choices (with noticeably consequences!) along it.

Improvisation is probably the greatest tool in a DM's toolkit. It pretty much defines how much preperation you need to run a pleasant session. It's something that needs a lot of training to master, but once you've got the hang of it, you will greatly decrease the amount of preperation you have to do.

# NPC's
These are the people that make your world real, do them right and your campaign can be a lot more than a game, it can be a great story. For all important NPC's write down atleast a few sentences on their appearence, behaviour, goals and flaws. It is definitely not required that you have a stat block for all NPC's your players meet. You also don't have to change your voice when speaking as a NPC, but try to give your speech a unique spin. Talk fast for a nervous NPC, talk slow and with long pauses for a wise old man or a really dumb ogre. You can speak gramatically incorrect for a foreigner or use fancy words for a aristocrat. 

# Conclusion
Thats it. I hope i have given you some things to think about. After all i want you to learn something, even if you say you definitely hate my approaches. You have learned what you don't want your preperation to be and that's a win for me.